---
title: Resting into Productivity
category: productivity
tags:
- productivity
- sleep
- rest
description: >
  Resting is as important as working. Never forget to rest so that you can
  consolidate learnings and be ready for a new day of work.
date: 2015-01-28
---

We all like to learn and be good at what we do. Right?

But, have you ever found yourself trying to be productive by making the most of
idle moments? Answering emails at waiting rooms, listening to audiobooks while
driving, or reading books cover to cover to learn new things?

Are you convinced that to be more productive you have to work more hours and
reducing your not working moments?

I did. And it is a huge mistake.

This article explains how resting, sleeping, and meditation helps us be more
productive and fight procrastination.

> Learning and creative thinking continues while we are resting.

The brain has two ways of working: focused and diffuse mode.

We are all familiar with the focused mode. This is our brain's state when we are
answering a test, watching a documentary, or the first minutes of a meeting
(let's face it, we all start to drift away on meetings). In this mode our brain
is fixated upon a given idea or concept. The focus point may change, but it's
only one at a given time. Logic processes and deduction dominates our thought
process, generating new ideas from previous ones.

The diffuse mode is less known but not less important. This our brain's state
when we are resting, more relaxed, and not thinking on a particular thing. In
this mode our thoughts wander from one idea or concept to the next, not
necessarily related, and never fixating on a given one. Logic processes and
deduction are not the ones generating new thoughts, thoughts which may be not
related at all.

Because the diffuse mode doesn't fixate on a particular idea, it can wander to
the different corners of your brain. This allows our brain to think outside the
box and approach problems in a different way. It also allows our brain to see
concepts we are trying to learn from a different point of view, and see
analogies between learnt ideas.

I like to think that the focused mode is like a sharp photo while the diffuse
mode is like a blurred photo.

On sharp photos we can focus on particular things, going from one to another
without mixing them. Like each of the different fruits in a photo; we could
probably even count them.

On blurred photos we can't focus on a particular thing since they start to mix.
Boundaries are not that clear. But we start to see other relationships, such as
colors and shapes.

Now you recognize the diffuse mode, right? We've all been there at some point.
You were there the last time you went from one idea to the solution and thought
_"yeah, that's it!"_.

Resting and not focusing on a given thing allows us to make use of the diffuse
mode.

So, if you want to be more productive, don't forget to rest every once in a
while to be able to tackle new problems. Try to forget about the problem and go
for a quick walk.

By the way, at least in my experience, watching TV is not resting. Watching TV
has a particular way of forcing you to be a little focused and it, somehow,
avoids you to take advantage of the diffuse mode.

> Sleep is an important part of our learning and creativity process.

I'm sure that in the past you've sacrificed a couple of hours of sleep in favor
of work, just to realize that what you worked on during sleep deprived hours
wasn't useful.

I know I have.

Moreover, I have also been stuck with a problem, went to sleep and woke up with
a new approach or even a solution.

This is because sleeping is very important for the learning and creativity
processes. Throughout the day you are continuously learning new things. This new
things are stored as neuronal paths. While you sleep, your brain cleans up the
information stored during day by strengthening practiced neuronal paths and
weakening unused neuronal paths.

A strong neuronal path is easier to recall and it can also be used to create new
information. It can be transferred as a new thought by making analogies, new
relationships can be made between paths, etc.

After sleeping you consolidate ideas and concepts and allows them to be used in
creative thinking.

But, that's not all. The diffuse mode is the predominant mode the brain is while
we sleep.

That's why after thinking hard on a problem before going to sleep, we might wake
up the next day surprised with a solution.

So, if you want to be more productive, don't sacrifice sleep over work! A tired
brain produces low quality work. Sleep consolidates the new things we learn and
increases our creativity.

> Meditation helps us leave the focused mode.

What if you are feeling stuck on a problem? What if you went to bed but can't
stop thinking on a problem? What if you know that resting and the diffuse mode
can help you but are having a hard time leaving the focused mode?

This is where meditation helps. The core of meditation is not to force your mind
to be in blank, which would be the focused mode, but to pay attention to
wandering thoughts and letting them go, which is the diffuse mode.

With a deliberate and periodic practice of meditation, you can strengthen the
neuronal paths of meditation. With a strong neuronal path, you will be able to
recall the process each time a little bit easier. This is very helpful when you
are feeling stuck in focused mode since meditation can help you leave it.

So, if you want to be productive, practice meditation on a daily basis to be
able to recall it each time with less effort.

> Resting helps us fight procrastination.

Many things can cause us to procrastinate. Personally, fear is the main cause of
my procrastination. Fear of exhausting an idea, fear of not being able to solve
a problem, fear of losing time to a solution that might not work, etc.

The Pomodoro Technique can easily solve procrastination because of boring tasks.
But I've found that when the cause of procrastination is fear, I just spend
those 25 minutes feeling anxious or frustrated and not knowing clearly what to
do.

Procrastination caused by fear is a little bit harder to overcome. I figured out
that it's harder because my brain was in focused mode fixating on the fear
itself. Resting and going into diffuse mode helps!

Just meditate a couple of minutes to allow your brain to go into diffuse mode.
If meditation is not working, you can go for a walk or maybe try to trick your
brain into sleeping.

There's a technique to make your brain go into a state similar to sleep but
avoiding you to fall asleep and forgetting whatever you might have figured out
in the process. Sit on a comfortable chair with your arm hanging down the side
and holding your keys. Then, relax and try not to fixate on a given idea. If you
fall asleep, your keys will fall and youâ€™ll wake up. As long as you are drifting
into sleep, your mind will wander between thoughts increasing your problem
solving skills.

I've found that letting my brain go into diffuse mode helps making some fears
disappear as new solutions and ways to approach the problem appears.

Do you remember that TV wasn't resting? Well, social networks, reading news,
answering emails isn't resting either. Don't lie to yourself. Fight
procrastination with proper resting and going into diffuse mode.

> If you want to be productive, don't forget to genuinely rest! Don't think that
> idle moments are a waste of time. Don't sacrifice sleep. And never stop
> strengthening your meditation neuronal paths.

This article was written as an assignment for the Learning How to Learn course.
All of the principles and theories are cited from the course.
